Blog post about using Open Policy Agent for Kafka authorization (#176)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2020-08-05-using-open-policy-agent-with-strimzi-and-apache-kafka.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Using Open Policy Agent with Strimzi and Apache Kafka"
date: 2020-08-05
author: jakub_scholz
---

One of the new features in Strimzi 0.19.0 is support for Kafka authorization using [Open Policy Agent](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/).
In this blog post, we will look at this feature in more detail.
It will explain the advantages and disadvantages of using it, compare it with other supported authorization methods and look at some interesting ways it can be used.

<!--more-->

Until Strimzi 0.19.0, we supported two types of authorization:

* The `simple` authorization which is using the `SimpleAclAuthorizer` which is part of the Apache Kafka project
* The `keycloak` authorization which is using [Keycloak Authorization Services](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/authorization_services/index.html)

> All three authorization types supported in Strimzi 0.19.0 are based on the same authorization interface provided by Kafka.

Author: It sounds weird when you take it out of context. But in the text it says _**Until Strimzi 0.19.0**, we supported two types of authorization_ and _All three authorization types **supported in Strimzi 0.19.0**_ which I think make it quite clear.

                    "Topic": ["Read", "Write", "Create", "Delete", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs"], 
                    "Group": ["Read", "Delete", "Describe"],
                    "Cluster": ["Create", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs"]
                    }

is_consumer_operation {
    consumer_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}

is_producer_operation {
    producer_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}

is_admin_operation {
    admin_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}
```

We also need to define the actual groups and their members:

```rego
consumer_group = ["tom", "tyrone", "matt", "pepe", "douglas"]
producer_group = ["jack", "conor", "keinan", "john"]
admin_group = ["dean", "christian"]

is_consumer_group {
    consumer_group[_] == principal.name
}

is_producer_group {
    producer_group[_] == principal.name
}

is_admin_group {
    admin_group[_] == principal.name
}
```

The group definition is accompanied by some helper rules.
Each group is defined as an array of its members.

> So we have the groups and their members hardcoded into the policy and to change them, you will need to change the policy.

Reviewer: does the OPA server loads the policy at runtime if you change it?

Author: You can do it using the REST API for example. But how to do it and hot to configure OPA is really out of scope for the blog post. It is not used in the example in my GitHub repo.

Next, we will create some helper rules for evaluating whether the request we are authorizing belongs to a user who is member of one of the groups and is for operation allowed for the group:

```rego
allow_consumer_group {
    is_consumer_operation
    is_consumer_group
}

allow_producer_group {
    is_producer_operation
    is_producer_group
}

allow_admin_group {
    is_admin_operation
    is_admin_group
}
```

When the operation we are authorizing belongs to the consumer operations and the user belongs to the consumer group, the `allow_consumer_group` will evaluate to `true`.
If the operation is not one of the operations allowed to consumers and/or the user doesn't belong to the consumer group, it will evaluate to `false`.
The other two rules - `allow_producer_group` and `allow_admin_group` - work in the same way.

Last, we need to add the `allow` rule which is what the Kafka Authorizer will actually call:

```rego
allow {
    not deny
}

deny {
    not allow_consumer_group
    not allow_producer_group
    not allow_admin_group
}

> ```

Reviewer: as far as I understood in the OPA configuration you define the URL where you have the "rule" and in this case, it's `allow`. Why do we need to define the `deny` one, if it's not being used by the OPA authorizer?

Author: The `allow` is calling the `deny` rule. This is related to how the rules are evaluated in OPA and what Kafka expects as an answer from the authorizer => true (allowed) or false (denied) - so we have to basically invert the result of the `deny` rule.

Reviewer: can't you just define `allow` allowing and not inverting `deny`? or OPA forces to have both `allow` and `deny`?

Author: Not to my knowledge (but it is not as if I'm Rego expert). 

To my understanding, when the rule consists from multiple sub-rules, they are handled as `rule AND rule AND ...`.  As a result, this:

```
deny {
    not allow_consumer_group
    not allow_producer_group
    not allow_admin_group
}
```

will evaluate as denied when the user is not allowed through any of the sub-rules. So when the user matches at least one of them, it will be allowed.

If you would do something like this instead:

```
allow {
   allow_consumer_group
   allow_producer_group
   allow_admin_group
}
```

it would allow the user only if all of these rules evaluate to true. Otherwise it would be denied. So the user would need to be valid consumer, producer and admin at the same time just to produce messages for example. So it would not work.

Reviewer: ok it makes more sense now. Thanks.

```rego
consumer_operations = {
                        "Topic": ["Read", "Describe"], 
                        "Group": ["Read", "Describe"]
                    }

producer_operations = {
                        "Topic": ["Write", "Describe"]
                    }

admin_operations = {
                    "Topic": ["Read", "Write", "Create", "Delete", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs"], 
                    "Group": ["Read", "Write", "Create", "Delete", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs"],
                    "Cluster": ["Read", "Write", "Create", "Delete", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs", "IdempotentWrite"]
                    }

is_consumer_operation {
    consumer_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}

is_producer_operation {
    producer_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}

is_admin_operation {
    admin_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}
```

> But we will not hardcode the groups in the policy anymore.
> Instead, we will use the `KafkaUser` and `KafkaTopic` resources to define them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But we will not hardcode the groups in the policy anymore, instead, we will use the `KafkaUser` and `KafkaTopic` custom resources to define them.
```

> We will use the annotation `groups` on `KafkaUser` custom resource to define into which groups does this user belong.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use the annotation `groups` on the `KafkaUser` custom resource to define into which groups this user belongs.
```

In the example below, you can see an user `payment-processing` who belongs into groups `invoicing` and `orders`

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaUser
metadata:
  name: payment-processing
  annotations:
    groups: '["invoicing", "orders"]'
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  authentication:
    type: tls
```

Similarly, we can use the `KafkaTopic` to define who can produce to it and consume from it.
We will use the `producer-groups` and `consumer-groups` annotations for this:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1alpha1
kind: KafkaTopic
metadata:
  name: new-orders
  annotations:
    consumer-groups: '["invoicing", "marketing"]'
    producer-groups: '["orders"]'
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  partitions: 12
```

The kube-mgmt sidecar will load these into the OPA where we can use them in our policy.

> When the authorization request is for a topic resource, we will match the groups into which the user belongs against the groups allowed to produce or consume from given topic:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the authorization request is for a topic resource, we will match the groups into which the user belongs, against the groups allowed to produce or consume from a given topic:
```

```rego
is_consumer_group {
    user_groups(principal.name)[_] == topic_consumer_groups(topic_name)[_]
}

is_producer_group {
    user_groups(principal.name)[_] == topic_producer_groups(topic_name)[_]
}

user_groups(user) = groups {
    groups := json.unmarshal(kafkausers[_][user].metadata.annotations["groups"])
}

topic_consumer_groups(topic) = groups {
    groups := json.unmarshal(kafkatopics[_][topic].metadata.annotations["consumer-groups"])
}

topic_producer_groups(topic) = groups {
    groups := json.unmarshal(kafkatopics[_][topic].metadata.annotations["producer-groups"])
}
```

> The policy above will extract the groups from the custom resource annotations.
> And see if there is any group shared between the user and the topic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The policy above will extract the groups from the custom resource annotations to see if there is any group shared between the user and the topic.
```

    startswith(group_name, principal.name)
}

allow_producer {
    is_topic_resource
    is_producer_operation
    is_producer_group
}

allow_admin {
    is_admin_operation
    is_admin_group
}
```

The full policy including some additional helper functions can be found on my [GitHub](https://github.com/scholzj/demo-opa-kafka-authorization/blob/master/advanced-example-policy.rego).

## Conclusion

The main advantage of Open Policy Agent authorization compared to the `simple` or Keycloak authorizers is its flexibility.
The examples from the previous sections demonstrate how easily you can use OPA and Rego to combine data from different sources and use them for the authorization decisions.

With the `simple` authorizer, you have to follow the ACL rules defined for each user and stored in ZooKeeper.
With Keycloak, you can use the permissions defined in Keycloak.
But with OPA, you can use any external data you want.
OPA calls this _context-aware authorization and decisions_.
You can [easily integrate](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/external-data/) OPA with different external data sources and use these data for the decision making to do exactly what you want.

> The main disadvantage is that unless you are already using OPA for other applications, you will need to run yet another application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main disadvantage is that unless you are already using OPA for other applications, you will need to run another application.
```

I think yet another sounds like this is more negative than it may well be.

> But the great think is that Open Policy Agent has many integrations and can be used with many different applications and not just with Apache Kafka.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the great thing is that Open Policy Agent has many integrations and can be used with many different applications and not just with Apache Kafka.
```
I think we should maybe restructure this conclusion to have a more hard hitting finisher.

Author: What would you imagine as _hard hitting finisher_?

---
layout: post
title:  "Using Open Policy Agent with Strimzi and Apache Kafka"
date: 2020-08-05
author: jakub_scholz
---

One of the new features in Strimzi 0.19.0 is support for Kafka authorization using [Open Policy Agent](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/).

> In this blog post, we will look at this feature with more detail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we will look at this feature in more detail.
```

> It will explain the (dis)advantages, compare it with other supported authorization methods and look at some interesting ways how to use it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will explain the advantages and disadvantages of using it, compare it with other supported authorization methods and look at some interesting ways it can be used.
```

When a Kafka client tries to call some Kafka API, Kafka will pass the following information to the authorization plugin:
* Operation (`Read`, `Write`, `Create`, `Delete`, `Alter`, `Describe`, `ClusterAction`, `DescribeConfigs`, `AlterConfigs`, `IdempotentWrite`, and `All`)
* Resource type (`Topic`, `Group`, `Cluster`, `TransactionalId`, `DelegationToken`)
* Resource name
* User identity
* Address from which the user connects

Every authorizer implementation receives the same information and the only difference is how it evaluates it and decides whether to allow or deny the operation.

## Simple authorization

The `simple` authorization is based on the default authorizer plugin shipped with Apache Kafka.
It was originally implemented in Scala class `SimpleAclAuthorizer` - that is where the `simple` keyword is coming from.
In newer Kafka versions it has been replaced with new Java class `AclAuthorizer` which is backward compatible and Strimzi will migrate to it in one of the future releases.

With `simple` authorization, you have to specify the ACL rules for each user.
The ACL rules have to cover all operations which the user is allowed to do.

> You can use prefix or the `*` wildcard to cover multiple resource names with one ACL rule, but that is it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use prefix or the `*` wildcard to cover multiple resource names with one ACL rule.
```
Last bit feels redundant.

> It also doesn't support any groups, so even if you have multiple users with the same rights, you need to configure the ACL rules individually for each of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also doesn't support any concept of groupings of users, so even if you have multiple users with the same rights, you need to configure the ACL rules individually for each of them.
```

But you can also use it for authorization thanks to our own `KeycloakRBACAuthorizer`.

The `keycloak` authorization is based on the [Keycloak Authorization Services](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/authorization_services/index.html).
It can be used only in combination with OAuth 2.0 authentication.
Security policies and permissions are defined in Keycloak and are used to grant access to resources on Kafka brokers. 
Users and clients are matched against policies that permit access to perform specific actions on Kafka brokers.
You can also use the _federation_ feature of Keycloak to map the policies for example against LDAP groups.
The `KeycloakRBACAuthorizer` will fetch the list of granted permissions from Keycloak and enforce the authorization rules locally to make sure it doesn't negatively impact performance.

The main advantage of Keycloak is that you can have everything managed centrally.
Not just for Strimzi and Apache Kafka, but for all your applications which support OAuth.
It can also handle both authentication and authorization.

> So you do not need to have different servers for authentication and authorization and all data are stored in one place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So you do not need to have different servers for authentication and authorization, so all access data is stored in one place.
```

On the other hand, you will still need to run and manage Keycloak.

> So unless you already use it or at least plan to use some central authentication / authorization server anyway, this will be additional effort you would need to deal with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unless you already use it or at least plan to use some central authentication / authorization server anyway, this will be additional effort you would need to deal with.
```

## Open Policy Agent

[Open Policy Agent](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/) (OPA) is an open source policy engine.
It can be used to enforce policies across your whole architecture stack.
The policies are declarative and to write them it is using its own language called _Rego_.
OPA can be used for policy based control of many different applications.
It can be used with Kubernetes, APIs, SSH, CI/CD pipelines and many more.

![Open Policy Agent](/assets/images/posts/2020-08-05-using-open-policy-agent-with-strimzi-and-apache-kafka.png)

OPA decouples the policy decision making from enforcing the decision.

> When used with Kafka, the authorizer running inside Kafka will call OPA server to evaluate the policy based on the input from the authorizer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When used with Kafka, the authorizer running inside Kafka will call the OPA server to evaluate the policy based on the input from the authorizer.
```

The input will be the same set of information as with any other Kafka authorizer.

> It is described in the introduction to this blog post.

Reviewer 2: Maybe title the start so we can link to it again for convenience

Author: The blog posts do not support deep linking. So I do not think it is needed.

OPA will evaluate the policy and respond to the authorizer request with a decision.
And the authorizer will either allow or deny the operation.

> The decisions are of course cached by the authorizer to make sure the performance of the Kafka cluster is not affected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The decisions are cached by the authorizer to make sure the performance of the Kafka cluster is not affected.
```

> We didn't developed our own OPA Authorizer for Kafka.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strimzi has not developed their own OPA Authorizer for Kafka.
```

Author: This feels weird. _We are Strimzi_ and we wrote this blog post. So this feels like talking about my self in a third person.

> Instead we are using the existing [OPA Plugin from Bisnode](https://github.com/Bisnode/opa-kafka-plugin).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead we are using an existing [OPA Plugin provided by Bisnode](https://github.com/Bisnode/opa-kafka-plugin).
```

### Configuring OPA authorizer

Before we configure our Kafka cluster to use OPA, we first need to deploy the OPA server.

> If you don't use OPA yet, you can follow [this guide](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/deployments/#kubernetes) from the OPA documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not have an OPA deployed yet, you can follow [this guide](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/deployments/#kubernetes) the OPA deployment documentation.
```

Author: I think the `from` was supposed to stay there? Also the `an` in `an OPA` sounds very weird to me. Should it really be there?

Reviewer 2: Sorry a typo on my part.

Once you have OPA running, you can configure the OPA authorizer in your `Kafka` custom resource.

> The basic configuration should looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic configuration should look like this:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
    authorization:
      type: opa
      url: http://opa.namespace.svc:8181/v1/data/kafka/authz/allow
    # ...
```

For using OPA authorizer, you have to set the `type` field to `opa`.
You also always need to configure the `url`.

> The URL will not just tell it how to connect to the OPA server.
> But it will also specify which policy and rule should be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The URL will not just tell it how to connect to the OPA server, but it will also specify which policy and rule should be used.
```

In the above example, we will connect to the OPA server at `http://opa.namespace.svc:8181`.
And the `/kafka/authz/allow` part defines that we will use the `allow` decision from the policy from package `kafka.authz`.

> There are some additional options which are optional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is also some additional optional configuration.
```

> You can configure the decision cache - its capacity and expiration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure the capacity and expiration time for the decision cache.
```

You can also configure super users which will be allowed everything without asking OPA for a decision.
The full OPA authorizer configuration might look for example like this:

```yaml
authorization:
  type: opa
  url: http://opa.namespace.svc:8181/v1/data/kafka/authz/allow
  allowOnError: false
  initialCacheCapacity: 1000
  maximumCacheSize: 10000
  expireAfterMs: 60000
  superUsers:
    - CN=henri
    - anwar
    - CN=wesley
```

### Examples policies

Explaining the basics of the Rego language and Open Policy Agent policies goes well beyond the scope of this blog post.

> Both is nicely explained in the [OPA documentation](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both are nicely explained in the [OPA documentation](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/).
```

> But I will show you some examples how you can use OPA with Apache Kafka to demonstrate its strength and versatility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But I will show you some examples of how you can use OPA with Apache Kafka to demonstrate its strength and versatility.
```

> The complete policy files from these examples including the instructions how to use them can be found on my [GitHub](https://github.com/scholzj/demo-opa-kafka-authorization).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The complete policy files from these examples including the instructions on how to use them can be found on my [GitHub](https://github.com/scholzj/demo-opa-kafka-authorization).
```

Additionally, the OPA documentation has a simple demo for [Kafka authorization](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/kafka-authorization/) as well.

### Group based authorization

> One of the features users are asking for from time to time is group based authorization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the features Strimzi users are asking for is group based authorization.
```
I think the frequency is not needed, and to say we are addressing the desire if enough.

                        "Topic": ["Write", "Describe"]
                    }

admin_operations = {
                    "Topic": ["Read", "Write", "Create", "Delete", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs"], 
                    "Group": ["Read", "Delete", "Describe"],
                    "Cluster": ["Create", "Alter", "Describe", "ClusterAction", "DescribeConfigs", "AlterConfigs"]
                    }

is_consumer_operation {
    consumer_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}

is_producer_operation {
    producer_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}

is_admin_operation {
    admin_operations[input.resource.resourceType.name][_] == input.operation.name
}
```

We also need to define the actual groups and their members:

```rego
consumer_group = ["tom", "tyrone", "matt", "pepe", "douglas"]
producer_group = ["jack", "conor", "keinan", "john"]
admin_group = ["dean", "christian"]

is_consumer_group {
    consumer_group[_] == principal.name
}

is_producer_group {
    producer_group[_] == principal.name
}

is_admin_group {
    admin_group[_] == principal.name
}
```

> The group definition is again accompanied by some helper rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The group definition is accompanied by some helper rules.
```
